Chapter 1: How the Regulations Apply to Domestic Property  
 
The Regulations mean that a domestic private rented property in England or 
Wales should not be let if its energy performance indicator is below EPC E.  
This chapter is aimed at domestic landlords and outlines the factors landlords 
need to consider when determining if a property they let is covered by the 
minimum level of energy efficiency provisions. Enforcement authorities and 
others with an interest in domestic rented property will also find this 
information useful. 

1.1 Domestic private rented sector (PRS) scope 
1.1.1 Properties covered by the minimum level of energy efficiency 
provisions  
The Regulations discussed in this guidance document apply to all domestic PRS 
properties in England and Wales which are: 
 
a) let under certain types of domestic tenancy (see section 1.1.2 below) and  
b) which are legally required to have an Energy Performance Certificate 
(EPC) (see section 1.1.4 below).  
  
For the avoidance of doubt, this means that where a domestic private rented 
property meets these two conditions, it will be covered by the Regulations, 
irrespective of property type, length of tenancy, location, listed status, property 
size or any other characteristic. Conversely, where a property is let on a relevant 
tenancy type but is not legally required to have an EPC, or if it is required to have 
an EPC but is not let on a relevant tenancy, that property will not be covered and 
will not be required to comply with the Regulations. 
 
Licence vs Tenancy 
Please note, licences are not the same as tenancies, and a licence is not 
considered to be a tenancy for the purposes of the Regulations. A tenancy 
grants exclusive possession of the property, while a licence is merely 
permission for a licensee to do something on the property. If there are any 
concerns about whether a property is occupied under a licence or a 
tenancy, and whether the landlord is subject to the Regulations, legal 
advice should be sought. 
 
1.1.2 Relevant Tenancies (regulation 19) 
For the purposes of the domestic minimum standard provisions the relevant 
tenancy types are11:  
• An assured tenancy (including an assured shorthold tenancy) defined in 
the Housing Act 1988; 
• A regulated tenancy defined in the Rent Act 1977; 
• A domestic agricultural tenancy as set out in the Energy Efficiency 
(Domestic Private Rented Property) Order 201512 as follows: 
o A tenancy which is an assured agricultural occupancy for the 
purposes of section 24 of the Housing Act 1988; 
o A tenancy which is a protected occupancy for the purposes of 
section 3(6) of the Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976; 
o A statutory tenancy for the purposes of section 4(6) of the Rent 
(Agriculture) Act 1976.