Chapter 1: How the Regulations Apply to Domestic Property  
 
The Regulations mean that a domestic private rented property in England or 
Wales should not be let if its energy performance indicator is below EPC E.  
This chapter is aimed at domestic landlords and outlines the factors landlords 
need to consider when determining if a property they let is covered by the 
minimum level of energy efficiency provisions. Enforcement authorities and 
others with an interest in domestic rented property will also find this 
information useful. 

1.1 Domestic private rented sector (PRS) scope 
1.1.1 Properties covered by the minimum level of energy efficiency 
provisions  
The Regulations discussed in this guidance document apply to all domestic PRS 
properties in England and Wales which are: 
 
a) let under certain types of domestic tenancy (see section 1.1.2 below) and  
b) which are legally required to have an Energy Performance Certificate 
(EPC) (see section 1.1.4 below).  
  
For the avoidance of doubt, this means that where a domestic private rented 
property meets these two conditions, it will be covered by the Regulations, 
irrespective of property type, length of tenancy, location, listed status, property 
size or any other characteristic. Conversely, where a property is let on a relevant 
tenancy type but is not legally required to have an EPC, or if it is required to have 
an EPC but is not let on a relevant tenancy, that property will not be covered and 
will not be required to comply with the Regulations. 
 
Licence vs Tenancy 
Please note, licences are not the same as tenancies, and a licence is not 
considered to be a tenancy for the purposes of the Regulations. A tenancy 
grants exclusive possession of the property, while a licence is merely 
permission for a licensee to do something on the property. If there are any 
concerns about whether a property is occupied under a licence or a 
tenancy, and whether the landlord is subject to the Regulations, legal 
advice should be sought. 
 
1.1.2 Relevant Tenancies (regulation 19) 
For the purposes of the domestic minimum standard provisions the relevant 
tenancy types are11:  
• An assured tenancy (including an assured shorthold tenancy) defined in 
the Housing Act 1988; 
• A regulated tenancy defined in the Rent Act 1977; 
• A domestic agricultural tenancy as set out in the Energy Efficiency 
(Domestic Private Rented Property) Order 201512 as follows: 
o A tenancy which is an assured agricultural occupancy for the 
purposes of section 24 of the Housing Act 1988; 
o A tenancy which is a protected occupancy for the purposes of 
section 3(6) of the Rent (Agriculture) Act 1976; 
o A statutory tenancy for the purposes of section 4(6) of the Rent 
(Agriculture) Act 1976. 
 
Background information on common domestic tenancy types can be found here13 
and at Appendix B. 
 
Social Housing Exclusion 
The minimum standards do not apply in the social housing sector. 
Therefore, even if a property is let on one of the tenancy types listed above, 
it will be excluded from the minimum standard provisions if it is either of the 
following14: 
 
- Low cost rental accommodation defined by section 69 of the Housing and 
Regeneration Act 2008 and the landlord is a private registered provider of 
social housing; or 
- Low cost home ownership accommodation within the meaning of section 
70 of the Housing and Regeneration Act 2008. 
 
A property will also be excluded if the landlord is a body registered as a 
social landlord under Chapter 1 of Part 1 of the Housing Act 1996. 
 
1.1.3 Meeting the minimum standard, and sub-standard property 
(regulation 22) 
Where a domestic private rented property is legally required to have an EPC and 
is let on a tenancy type described at 1.1.2 above, it will meet the minimum 
standard if, from the trigger dates discussed at section 1.2.1, it has a valid EPC 
which shows that the energy efficiency rating for the property is E or above. 
Where a property is at EPC E or above, the property will be compliant with the 
Regulations, and the landlord will not be required to take any action.  
 
A property is below the minimum level of energy efficiency, and is therefore 
defined as sub-standard and non-compliant by the Regulations, if there is a valid 
EPC which shows that the energy efficiency rating is below an E (i.e. it is an EPC 
rating of F or G). In this case the landlord will need to take steps to comply, either 
by improving the property to a minimum of EPC E (see chapter two), or 
registering an exemption on the PRS Exemptions Register, if they meet the 
criteria for an exemption (see chapter four). 
 
 
1.1.4 Energy Performance Certificate (EPC) ratings 
1.1.4.1 EPC Overview  
As noted at the beginning of this chapter, alongside tenancy type considerations, 
the Regulations only apply to those domestic properties which are legally 
required to have an EPC. This means properties required to have an EPC by any 
of the following: 

• The Energy Performance of Buildings (Certificates and Inspections) 
(England and Wales) Regulations 200715, 
• The Building Regulations 2010,  
• The Energy Performance of Buildings (England and Wales) Regulations 
2012.   
 
Separate government guidance on EPC rules for domestic properties can be 
found here16. 
Broadly speaking, since 2008 an owner or landlord has, on sale, letting or 
construction of a property, been required to make an EPC available to the 
prospective buyer or tenant (although in the case of construction projects, 
typically the person carrying out the work will supply the EPC)17. In addition to 
the above, a new EPC is likely to be necessary if a building is modified to have 
more or fewer parts than it originally had, and the modification includes the 
provision or extension of fixed services for heating, hot water, air conditioning or 
mechanical ventilation (i.e. services that condition the indoor climate for the 
benefits of the occupants). While some of the improvements which may be made 
to a property in order to comply with the Regulations may count as modification 
for the purposes of the EPC requirements, the majority will not.  
Where an EPC is legally required for a property, then not having one is unlawful 
and could be subject to non-compliance penalties18. Local weights and measures 
authorities (usually through their trading standards officers) are responsible for 
enforcing the Regulations that require an EPC to be made available. The Ministry 
of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) monitors 
enforcement activity through regular reports compiled and submitted by these 
authorities. 
Further information on EPC requirements for dwellings can be found here19.  
 
A sample EPC in PDF format is available at the following address: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/59
96/2116821.pdf. 
Where a property already has a valid EPC, this EPC can be retrieved from the 
Domestic Energy Performance Certificate Register20 (unless the owner has 
opted out of the EPC register).  You can search for the EPC by the property’s 
address21 or by the EPCs report reference number22. 
When produced, an EPC will also be accompanied by a recommendations report 
setting out any energy efficiency measures which may be suitable for installation 
in the property23. Answers to a range of frequently asked questions about EPCs 
can be found here24. 
 
1.1.4.2 EPCs -Ten Year Validity 
Once an EPC is lodged on the EPC register (the EPC assessor is responsible for 
ensuring this happens) it is valid for a period of ten years.  A new EPC is not 
required each time there is a change of tenancy (or even when the property is 
sold), provided the earlier certificate is no more than ten years old. An owner, 
landlord or tenant will be free to commission a further EPC within that ten-year 
period if they choose. If a voluntary EPC of this type is produced and lodged for a 
property which is already legally required to have a valid EPC, then this new EPC 
will become the current one for the property, replacing the earlier one. 
Once an EPC reaches the ten-year point and expires, there is no automatic 
requirement for a new one to be commissioned. A further EPC will only be 
required the next time a trigger point is reached, i.e. when the property is next 
sold, let to a new tenant, or modified in the manner described in section 1.1.4.1 
EPC Overview above.  
There is also no requirement to produce a new EPC after carrying out energy 
efficiency improvement works to comply with the Regulations. However, for the 
purposes of the Regulations, it is recommended that landlords do commission a 
fresh, post installation EPC. A new EPC will reflect the improvements made, 
alongside any change to the energy efficiency rating of the property. A post 
installation EPC will, in all likelihood, be the easiest way for a landlord to 
demonstrate that they have complied with the Regulations25.   
EPCs relate to the property rather than to the owner or occupier and remain valid 
irrespective of the owner. Therefore, an EPC obtained by a previous owner of the 
property will remain valid after a property is sold on, so long as it is less than ten 
years old. EPCs relate to the property rather than how it is used or occupied.  
Therefore, an EPC obtained by a previous owner of the property will remain valid 
after a property is sold on, so long as it is less than ten years old.
  
1.1.4.3 EPCs and multi-let buildings 
In some cases, particularly for buildings which may contain multiple self-
contained units which are let to different tenants, there may be multiple EPCs 
covering varying parts of the building. There may also be a separate EPC 
relating to the envelope of the building as a whole. These separate EPCs may 
provide varying energy efficiency ratings and, depending on circumstances, may 
have been produced at different times.  
For the purposes of the minimum standard Regulations, the minimum EPC 
requirement is linked to the “property” being let which can be either a “[whole] 
building or part of a building”. In cases where the property being let is a discrete 
unit within a building (for example a room in a house share which is rented out on 
an individual basis), rather than the entire building, and where there is an EPC 
for the entire building, but also one for the discrete space being let, then the 
relevant EPC will be the one for the discrete space. Where there is only an EPC 
for the entire building (and where an EPC for the discrete space is not legally 
required) then that whole-building EPC will be the relevant EPC.   
The landlord, then, should identify which EPC relates to the “property” that is 
subject to the relevant tenancy (or tenancies) and take action to improve the 
energy efficiency rating to the minimum standard, if necessary. A landlord should 
seek independent legal advice if they are in any doubt about which EPC is 
required. 
As the relevant EPC will be the one related to the property being let, the landlord 
will only be required to install relevant measures which improve the energy 
performance of that property. In some cases, measures installed to improve the 
energy efficiency of a discrete space may also improve the energy efficiency of 
other spaces or units within a multi-let building. This is entirely acceptable.   
 
1.1.4.4 Circumstances where an EPC may not be required 
Guidance26 issued by the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local 
Government (MHCLG) notes that an EPC is not required where the landlord (or 
the seller, if relevant) can demonstrate that the building is any of the following: 
• a building that is officially protected27 as part of a designated environment 
or because of their special architectural or historic merit where compliance 
with certain minimum energy efficiency requirements would unacceptably 
alter their character or appearance; 
• a building used as places of worship and for religious activities; 
• a temporary building with a planned time of use of two years or less; 
• Industrial sites, workshops, non-residential agricultural buildings with low 
energy demand and non-residential agricultural buildings which are in use 
by a sector covered by a national sectorial agreement on energy 
performance; 
• stand-alone buildings with a total useful floor area of less than 50m² (i.e. 
buildings entirely detached from any other building); or 
• HMO’s (Houses in Multiple Occupation, for example these can be bedsits, 
hostels, shared houses etc) which have not been subject to a sale in the 
previous ten years, or which have not been let as a single rental in the 
past ten years.   
 
Notes on EPC exemptions for domestic premises can be found here. 
A building will also not need an EPC where the landlord can demonstrate that it 
is furnished holiday accommodation as defined by HMRC and the holiday-maker 
is not responsible for meeting the energy costs. Under certain circumstances 
buildings may also be exempt from the requirement to obtain an EPC where it 
may be demonstrated that they are to be demolished. This is subject to a number 
of strict conditions as set out in regulation 8 of the Energy Performance of 
Buildings (England and Wales) Regulations 2012. Further information on the 
definitions of the building types set out above is provided at Appendix C of this 
guidance. 
There are no other exceptions to the EPC obligations although there may be 
some transactions which do not qualify as a sale or a letting.  If in doubt, legal 
advice should be sought. Please note that neither BEIS or MHCLG are able to 
provide specific advice regarding whether any of these EPC exemptions apply to 
specific properties. 
 
1.1.4.5 Voluntary EPCs obtained for properties which are not legally 
required to have one 
In situations where an owner or occupier of a building which is not legally 
required to have an EPC has obtained one voluntarily (i.e. a voluntary EPC for a 
property which has not been sold, let or modified within the past ten years), the 
landlord will not be required to comply with the minimum standard Regulations 
(and no exemption will be necessary, as the minimum standard Regulations will 
not apply to that property). A voluntary EPC may have been commissioned by a 
landlord who believed in error that one was required for their property, or it may 
be one commissioned by a property owner or occupant who simply wanted 
reliable advice on how to reduce energy waste.  
A voluntary EPC may be registered on the official EPC database, but there is no 
requirement to do so. Where a voluntary EPC has been registered on the 
database it will supersede any earlier EPC that may have existed for the 
property, but official registration of a voluntary EPC will not, in itself, require the 
landlord to comply with the minimum standard.  
However, if having acquired a voluntary EPC for a property they let, a landlord 
subsequently markets that property for let, that act will trigger the legal 
requirement for the property to have an EPC (and the EPC details will need to be 
displayed as part of the marketing material for that property). The landlord will be 
able to use the voluntarily obtained EPC to market the property (so long as the 
EPC is less than 10 years old), and the fact that the property is now legally 
required to have an EPC will mean that the property will now be covered by the 
minimum standard Regulations (even though the EPC was initially obtained on a 
voluntary basis). 
 
Listed Buildings and EPC Compliance 
There is a common misunderstanding regarding listed buildings and 
whether they are exempt from the legal requirement to obtain an EPC. 
Listed properties, and buildings within a conservation area, will not 
necessarily be exempt from the requirement to have an EPC when they are 
sold or let and it will be up to the owner of a listed building to understand 
whether or not their particular property is required to have one. Where a 
listed domestic private rented property, or a property within a conservation 
area, is required to have an EPC, that property will be within scope of the 
minimum energy efficiency standard and will need to be compliant 
(complying means either being at a minimum of EPC band E, or having a 
valid exemption registered for it). If a property is not legally required to have 
an EPC, then that property will not be covered by the minimum standard 
Regulations, and no exemption will be necessary. 
Guidance issued by the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local 
Government (MHCLG) on EPC requirements29 states: 
[B]uildings protected as part of a designated environment or because of 
their special architectural or historical merit are exempt from the 
requirements to have an energy performance certificate insofar as 
compliance with minimum energy performance requirements would 
unacceptably alter their character or appearance. 
To comply with minimum energy performance requirements, many of the 
recommendations in an EPC report e.g. double glazing, new doors and 
windows, external wall insulation, and external boiler flues would likely 
result in unacceptable alterations in the majority of historic buildings. These 
can include buildings protected as part of a designated environment or 
because of their special architectural or historical merit (e.g. listed buildings 
or buildings within a conservation area). In these cases, an EPC would not 
be required. 
Building owners will need to take a view as to whether this will be the case 
for their buildings. If there is any doubt as to whether works would 
unacceptably alter the character or appearance of a building, building 
owners may wish to seek the advice of their local authority’s conservation 
officer. 
 
In all cases it is vital that a landlord understands whether their property is legally 
required to have an EPC at any time from 1 April 2018 onwards, and whether it is 
or is not exempt from having to comply with the minimum level of energy 
efficiency provisions. If there is any doubt about whether a property (or the 
building it is in) is legally required to have an EPC (or whether an existing EPC is 
legally required or voluntary), or about any of the other criteria described above, 
advice should be sought from the local trading standards team.   
  
EPC Requirements, Ten Year Validity and the Minimum Energy 
Efficiency Standard 
The following scenarios are provided as illustrative examples, highlighting 
the ten-year validity of an EPC and the interactions with the minimum 
standards: 

Scenario one: 
A landlord intends to let a property on a new tenancy from 1 April 2019: If 
the property already has an EPC which is less than ten years old then this 
EPC can be used to let the property. If there is no EPC, or if there is an 
EPC which is more than ten years old, then the landlord will be required to 
obtain a new EPC to market and let the property. If the EPC (whether new 
or existing) shows an energy efficiency rating of F or G then the landlord will 
need to carry out energy efficiency improvement works (with a maximum 
value of £3,500) sufficient to improve the property to a minimum of E, or 
register a valid exemption if applicable, before issuing a tenancy 
agreement.  

Scenario two: 
A property let on a ten-year assured tenancy with an EPC rating of F, where 
the EPC was legally required and was obtained in 2015:  On 1 April 2020 
(the minimum standard “backstop” date – see section 1.2.1) the landlord is 
continuing to let the property and will have to comply with the minimum 
energy efficiency provisions. This is because there is a valid, legally 
required EPC for the property (the EPC will continue to be valid until 2025) 
and the minimum standard “backstop” date has been reached. 

Scenario three: 
An EPC F rated property let on a twenty year tenancy where the EPC was 
obtained in 2009:  On 1 April 2020 the landlord is continuing to let the 
property, but in this scenario the property will not be captured by the 
minimum energy efficiency provisions because the EPC will have expired 
during 2019, and there is no legal requirement on the landlord to obtain a 
new one at that point (because the tenancy is ongoing). The landlord will 
only be required to obtain a new EPC (which will trigger a need to comply 
with the minimum energy efficiency provisions) if they intend to remarket the 
property for let once the current tenancy expires, or if they (or their tenant) 
modify the property in a manner which would require a new EPC to be 
obtained.

Note: Landlords will wish to be aware that the calculation methodologies 
underpinning EPCs are updated periodically to account for new 
performance data (the methodology for existing dwellings is called the 
Reduced Data Standard Assessment Procedure, or RdSAP). This means 
that, depending on the characteristics of a particular building, or unit within 
a building, the EPC band may change irrespective of any improvement 
works undertaken. Therefore, even if an EPC for a property is current (i.e. 
less than ten years old), the landlord may wish to obtain advice as to the 
rating that would apply to the building if a fresh EPC were commissioned, 
before deciding on a particular course of action in relation to compliance 
with the Regulations. 
RdSAP was last revised in late 2017, to encompass the latest 
developments in energy efficiency technology and other developments in 
the sector.

1.2 When do the minimum level of energy efficiency 
provisions apply? 
1.2.1 Prohibition on letting sub-standard domestic property 
(regulation 23) 
The domestic minimum standard is being introduced in a phased manner, with 
triggers for new tenancies entered into from 1 April 2018 onwards, and a 
“backstop” date of 1 April 2020 for all remaining tenancies.   
This means that, from 1 April 2018 onwards, landlords must not grant a new 
tenancy, or renew or extend an existing tenancy agreement to let EPC F or G 
rated domestic property, unless either: 

• the landlord has made all the relevant energy efficiency improvements that 
can be made to the property (or there are none that can be made) and the 
property’s energy performance indicator is still below an EPC E, and this 
exemption has been registered on the PRS Exemptions Register; or 
• no improvements have been made but a valid exemption applies which 
has been registered on the PRS Exemptions Register. 
 
Then, from 1 April 2020, landlords must not continue to let a sub-standard 
domestic property, even to existing tenants (where there has been no tenancy 
renewal, extension or indeed new tenancy), unless:  
• all relevant energy efficiency improvements have been made (or there are 
none that can be made), the EPC remains below E, and the situation has 
been registered on the Exemptions Register; or 
• no improvements have been made but a valid exemption applies and has 
been registered on the PRS Exemptions Register. 
 
So, since 1 April 2018, where a landlord intends to let a domestic property (or 
from 1 April 2020 continue to let such a property) they need to check whether 
their property is covered by the minimum level of energy efficiency provisions (as 
discussed above), and, if so, ensure that the EPC rating is at E or above (as 
discussed at section 1.1.3 above). If the EPC rating is below E, the landlord must 
either take appropriate steps to improve the rating to meet the minimum standard 
(see chapter two for more details) or register an exemption, if one applies (see 
chapters four and five for details on exemptions).  
 
Meaning of “grant a new tenancy”  
A tenancy is granted on the date a binding tenancy agreement is entered 
into between the landlord and the tenant. A binding tenancy agreement is a 
contract in which all the terms and conditions of the tenancy are finalised 
and there is an intention to vest exclusive possession to the tenant, either 
immediately or at a future date. Therefore, the grant of the tenancy 
becomes effective on the date all the terms and conditions are agreed, even 
where the date on which the tenant is permitted to take up possession of 
the property is subsequent to the date on which the tenancy is granted. 
For example, if a tenancy was granted before 1 April 2018 but the tenant 
took possession of the property on or after 1 April 2018, the landlord would 
not be subject to regulation 23. Providing the Landlord does not grant a new 
tenancy, or renew or extend the existing tenancy on or after 1 April 2018, 
the landlord will have until 1 April 2020 to improve the property’s rating to an 
E (or register an exemption, if one applies).   
 
1.2.2 Subletting of domestic property 
The responsibility for not letting a domestic property below EPC E applies to any 
person who lets, or proposes to let, a domestic private rented property. If the 
original tenancy allows a tenant to sublet the property, and that tenant proposes 
to enter into a sub-tenancy as a new landlord to a sub-tenant, then that original 
tenant/new landlord should not let the property until the minimum standard is 
reached, or until a valid exemption has been registered.  
In the case of subletting, an original tenant/new landlord may (subject to the 
terms of their tenancy) need to obtain consent from their superior landlord before 
making improvements to meet the minimum standard. Note that from 1 April 
2020, there is a continuing obligation on all domestic landlords to ensure the 
requirements of the Regulations are met (even where there has been no change 
or renewal of a tenancy), so the superior landlord should have already taken 
steps to improve a property to E before a post April 2020 subletting occurs.  
 Box Four 
Tenant obtaining landlord consent 
Where a tenant is looking to improve the energy efficiency of a property in 
preparation for renting that property to a sub-tenant (or for any other 
reason), that tenant may be required to obtain landlord consent before 
making the improvements. 
The tenant should request consent from their landlord in the way specified 
in their tenancy agreement. If the landlord consents, then the work may 
proceed, subject to any conditions which the landlord may have placed on 
the tenant. However, if the landlord withholds consent (or fails to respond to 
the request), then the tenant may have recourse to the Tenants’ Energy 
Efficiency Improvements provisions in Part 2 of the Regulations. Under 
these provisions tenants can request consent from their landlord to install 
energy efficiency improvements in the property they rent, and the landlord 
may not unreasonably refuse consent. These rights took effect from April 
2016, and are subject to the tenant securing suitable funding for the 
requested improvements.  
Guidance on the Tenant’s Energy Efficiency Improvements provisions can 
be found here. 30 
 
The extent to which a tenant is allowed to sublet a property will depend on the 
specific provisions of their particular tenancy. Even where subletting is permitted, 
the tenancy may make specific provision for which party would be liable for 
improvement costs in any given situation. For this reason, superior landlords, 
sub-landlords and tenants are advised to consult their tenancy, and seek their 
own advice, when considering their rights and responsibilities under their 
tenancy. 
Readers should also note that there are clear differences between subletting 
(where a tenant may become a landlord for the purposes of the Regulations), 
and arrangements such as assignment. In situations which do not result in the 
tenant becoming a new landlord for the purposes of the Regulations, any 
requirement to meet the minimum standard will remain with the original landlord. 
Again, appropriate legal advice should be sought if there is any doubt. 
 
Example Subletting Scenario 
The following scenarios are provided as illustrative examples, highlighting 
the way the minimum standards will apply to sub-letting scenarios pre and 
post April 2020. 
In both scenarios the original tenant is the tenant of an F rated property 
where the tenancy was entered into before April 2018. 

Scenario one - pre-April 2020 
If the original tenant sublets the property during 2019 or early 2020, liability 
for compliance with the minimum standard sits with that tenant (who is now 
a landlord) as that (original) tenant is now the landlord for the tenancy which 
has triggered the need to comply with the minimum standard. 

Scenario two - post April 2020 
If the original tenant intends to sublet the property after 1 April 2020 (after 
the backstop date has come into force), the original landlord should already 
have taken steps to either improve the property to a minimum of E, or 
register an exemption, if one applies. If this has not taken place then the  
original tenant will be unable to lawfully sublet the property until steps have 
been taken (either by the landlord, or by the original tenant on the landlord’s 
behalf) to rectify the situation. 
If the landlord has not improved the property to E (or higher) by 1 April 2020 
(or registered a valid exemption) they will be in breach of the Regulations 
for continuing to let a “sub-standard” property and may be subject to 
enforcement proceedings (see chapter six for more details on enforcement).

1.3. Mixed use properties and tenancy types 
There will be situations where a landlord will be a landlord of a property which 
includes a mix of residential and commercial units, and a mix of commercial and 
residential tenants. Examples will range from a building with a shop on the 
ground floor and one or two flats on the upper floors, to larger buildings with a 
number of commercial units on the ground floor and multiple residential flats on 
the upper floors.  
The Regulations apply to rented properties within such mixed-use buildings, 
although the triggers may be different depending on whether particular units are 
domestic or non-domestic. In many cases the distinction between the commercial 
and the residential units will be clear; however, there may be instances where a 
mixed-use property is let as a single unit. Where such a property falls below an 
EPC rating of E, the landlord will need to examine the tenancy to determine 
whether the property is domestic or non-domestic for the purposes of the 
Regulations, and whether it is required to comply with the minimum standard, 
and if so, by which trigger date31. 
Where a mixed-use property is rented on an assured tenancy (including an 
assured shorthold tenancy) for the purposes of the Housing Act 1988, a 
regulated tenancy under the Rent Act 1977, or a domestic agricultural tenancy 
under the Energy Efficiency (Domestic Private Rented Property) Order 2015, 
then it is likely to be considered a domestic property and should be treated 
accordingly. 
If a privately rented property is let under a tenancy but is not considered a 
“dwelling”, then it will be considered a non-domestic private rented property for 
the purposes of the Regulations32, and will need to comply with the minimum 
standards in accordance with the non-domestic trigger dates. In all cases it will 
be for the landlord to check their tenancy arrangements to understand what type 
of tenancy is in place, and they should seek appropriate legal advice if there is 
any uncertainty as to whether a property falls within the domestic or non-
domestic category33. Landlords may also wish to discuss any concerns with the 
relevant enforcement authority before determining any course of action. 

The Housing Health and Safety Rating System (HHSRS) 
While not directly related to the minimum level of energy efficiency, 
landlords should be aware of the Housing Health and Safety Rating System 
(HHSRS). The HHSRS is used to assess health and safety in residential 
properties, and was introduced by the Housing Act 2004. It assesses a 
range of potential hazards, including damp, excess cold and excess heat 
and categorises them according to seriousness. 
Local authorities have strong powers under the Housing Act 2004 to tackle 
poor property conditions which may impact peoples’ health. They must take 
enforcement action where the most serious hazards are present. 
If a local authority identifies a serious “category 1” hazard, it has a duty to 
take the most appropriate action. It may also take action for less serious 
category 2 hazards where this is considered the most satisfactory course of 
action. The HHSRS does not deal with a property being inefficient from an 
energy point of view; rather, action can be taken if there is excess cold or 
damp at the property, for example, but these two hazards can overlap in a 
situation where a property needs improvement from an energy efficiency 
perspective. 
Depending on the case, local authorities may aim to deal with problems 
informally at first, but if this is unsuccessful they may take legal action 
against a landlord requiring them to carry out improvements to the property; 
for example, by installing central heating and/or insulation to improve cold 
properties. Where a legal notice is served under the Housing Act 2004, the 
landlord will have to meet the cost of the required work. 
While some landlords of F and G rated rental properties may be able to 
claim valid exemptions from the requirement to improve a property to EPC 
E, this exemption will not excuse them from meeting the existing obligation 
keep their property free from serious hazards.  Failure to do so may result in
enforcement action regardless of the fact that the property may be exempt 
from the minimum level of energy efficiency. 
Because the HHSRS is so important to local authority enforcement of 
decent standards, and thereby the protection of peoples’ health, the 
Government has commissioned a scoping review to assess how well the 
HHSRS works in practice and ensure it is fit for purpose. 
Depending on the recommendations of the scoping review, a second review 
phase could involve anything from a full root-and-branch revision of the 
HHSRS down to a simple refresh of the standard and its accompanying 
guidance. 
The Government has also supported the Homes (Fitness for Human 
Habitation) Act which will come into force on 20th March 2019 and will 
require landlords to ensure that their properties are kept free of potentially 
serious hazards at the start of and throughout a tenancy.  Where a landlord 
fails to do so, their tenants will be able to seek redress in the courts. 
 
Frequently Asked Questions Relevant to Chapter One

Q: When do the minimum standard provisions come into force? 
A: The minimum standard came into effect for new domestic tenancy 
agreements from 1 April 2018, and will apply to all tenancies (including long 
term tenancies) from 1 April 2020, unless a lawful exemption applies (see 
chapter four).

Q: What types of tenancies are covered by the Regulations? 
A: The tenancy types are: 
• An assured tenancy (including an assured short hold tenancy) as 
defined in the Housing Act 1988; 
• A regulated tenancy defined in the Rent Act 1977; and 
• A domestic agricultural tenancy as set out in the Energy Efficiency 
(Domestic Private Rented Property) Order 2015 (see section 1.1.2 
Relevant Tenancies for more details).

Q: Are these Regulations UK-wide? 
A These Regulations apply to properties rented in England and Wales only. 
They do not apply to rental properties situated in Scotland or Northern Ireland.

Q: When do domestic private rented properties need to be at EPC E by? 
A: All domestic private rented properties covered by the minimum standard 
Regulations (i.e. those which are legally required to have an EPC, and which 
are let on a relevant tenancy type – see Q 2 above) must be at a minimum of 
EPC band E by 1 April 2020 (or have a valid exemption registered for them).  
Between 1 April 2018 and 1 April 2020, properties will only need to meet the 
standard (or have a valid exemption registered) at the point at which a new 
tenancy is entered into. Where no new tenancy has been entered into (i.e. the 
property is being let on a tenancy entered into before April 2018), a domestic 
private rented property may be lawfully let below EPC band E up until 1 April 
2020.

Q: My property is already above EPC F or G; do I need to do anything? 
A: No. If a domestic private rented property is already above EPC F or G, then 
no action is required by the landlord.

Q: What is an EPC and when is it required? 
A: Energy Performance Certificates (EPCs) are needed whenever an eligible 
property is constructed, or marketed for sale or let. Property owners must 
provide an EPC for potential buyers or tenants before marketing a property. 
This is a requirement of the Energy Performance of Buildings (England and 
Wales) Regulations 2012. In addition, a landlord will be required to obtain an 
EPC after installing certain improvements before they let the property. This is a 
requirement of the Building Regulations 2010. 
An EPC contains: 
 • information about a property’s energy use and typical energy costs, 
• recommendations about how to reduce energy use and save money 
An EPC for a domestic building gives the property an energy efficiency rating 
from A (most efficient) to G (least efficient) and is valid for ten years. The EPC 
relates to the property rather than to the owner, therefore an EPC obtained by 
a previous owner of the property will remain valid even after a property is sold 
on, so long as it is less than ten years old.

Q: How do I arrange an assessment in order to determine my property’s 
EPC rating and (if necessary what improvement works are needed to 
bring the minimum standard) who would perform the assessment? 
A: You can search for an accredited assessor to undertake a domestic EPC 
assessment here34. Since 2008 all rental properties (with few exceptions) have 
been required to have a valid EPC before being let on a new tenancy. 
Therefore, you should already have an EPC for your rental property, and to not 
have one is unlawful. If you do not have an EPC for the property that you rent, 
you should make arrangements to obtain one immediately.

Q: How can I find out the current EPC rating for my property is? 
A: If you don’t have your certificate to hand then you can search for a PDF 
copy using the property postcode here35.

Q: Are Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs) excluded from the 
minimum standard Regulations?  
A: HMOs are not excluded from the Regulations. The Regulations apply to all 
domestic private rented properties which are legally required to have an EPC, 
and which are let (including the letting of individual rooms) on a relevant 
tenancy type (see section 1.1.2). An HMO will be in scope where it meets 
these two criteria.  
However, individual rooms within HMOs are not required to have their own 
EPC, so a property which is an HMO will only have an EPC if one is required 
for the property as a whole (typically this will be if the property has been build, 
sold or rented as a single unit at any time in the past 10 years).  If an HMO is 
legally required to have an EPC, and if it is let on one of the qualifying tenancy 
types, then it will be required to comply with the minimum level of energy 
efficiency.   

Q: I am a landlord who lets holiday cottages throughout the year. I do not 
know the basis on which these particular properties are let; am I still 
required to comply with the minimum standard Regulations? 
A: Holiday cottages are typically let under a licence to occupy, rather than a 
tenancy. This type of rental property is, therefore, generally outside of the 
scope of the Regulations and not required to meet the minimum standard. If 
there are any concerns about whether a property is occupied under a licence 
or a tenancy, and whether the landlord is subject to the Regulations, legal 
advice should be sought. 

Q: How long is an EPC valid for and when or what triggers 
reassessment? 
A: Once produced, an EPC will be valid for ten years. A landlord can choose to 
commission a new EPC at any time for any reason, but this would be entirely 
voluntary. The only time a new EPC is legally required for a property is if the 
most recent certificate is more than ten years old, and the property is to be 
marketed for sale, or for rent to a new tenant.  

Q: I am a landlord with multiple F or G rated properties. Is there any 
flexibility that would be shown to me due to the scale of works that I need 
to commission? Is there a limit on the number of properties that I would 
need to improve to EPC E? 
A: No, all properties covered by the Regulations will need to comply and there 
is no limit on the number of properties a multi-property-owning landlord would 
be required to ensure are compliant. The amended Regulations are clear that 
landlords only need to undertake improvements which can be made either 
using third-party funding, or for £3,500 (inc. VAT) or less if self-funding. If no 
improvements can be made under either of these scenarios, the landlord would 
need to register an exemption for that property rather than improve it to E. But, 
assuming that improvements can be made for £3,500 (inc. VAT) or less (even 
if this does not improve the property all the way to E), there is no limit to the 
number of sub-standard properties a landlord is required to improve. 
However, landlords should note that between 1 April 2018 and 1 April 2020, 
properties only need to be improved to meet the standard when a new tenancy 
is entered into with a new or existing tenant. If a new tenancy has not been 
 entered into during that period, then a property may still be lawfully let below 
EPC E. Therefore, landlords with multiple properties would not necessarily 
need to improve all of their sub-standard properties at the same time and can 
phase improvement work over this two-year period as and when new tenancies 
are entered into.

Q: Are there any types of domestic rental property which are not covered 
by the Regulations 
A: The Regulations provisions apply to all domestic private rented properties 
that are a) legally required to have an EPC, and b) are let on a qualifying 
tenancy type.   
Listed buildings (and buildings within a conservation area) will not be required 
to meet the standards outlined in the Regulations if they are not required to 
have an EPC. If an individual listed building is required to have an EPC (and if 
it is let on a qualifying tenancy type) then it will be covered by the Regulations.  
An HMO which is not required to have an EPC (for example, if it has not been 
bought/sold in the previous ten years, or if it has not previously been rented out 
as a single property) will likewise not be covered by the Regulations.   

Q: What are the average energy bills for domestic properties across 
different EPC bands? 
A: The average modelled annual energy bills by EPC band using the Standard 
Assessment Procedure (SAP) methodology are as follows: 
EPC Band 
Average Annual 
Energy Bills, SAP-
based (201636) 
A/B £410 
C £660 
D £970 
E £1,420 
F £2,120 
G £3,100